[[IEEE 802.1X]] is an IEEE standard for port-based [[Network Access Control]]; it is part of the [[IEEE 802]] ([[IEEE 802.1|802.1]]) group of protocols. It provides [[authentication]] to devices attached to a [[Local area network|LAN]] port, establishing a point-to-point connection or preventing access from that port if authentication fails. It is also used for certain closed wireless [[access point]]s, and is based on the [[Extensible Authentication Protocol|EAP]], Extensible Authentication Protocol (RFC 2284). RFC 2284 has been obsoleted by RFC 3748.

802.1X is available on certain network switches, and can be configured to authenticate hosts which are equipped with supplicant software, denying unauthorized access to the network at the data link layer.

Many vendors are implementing 802.1X for wireless access points, to be used in  situations where an access point needs to be operated as a closed access point, addressing the security vulnerabilities of [[Wired Equivalent Privacy|WEP]] (see [[802.11i]]). The authentication is usually done a [[RADIUS]] server. This provides for client-only authentication, or more appropriately, strong mutual authentication using protocols such as [[Extensible_Authentication_Protocol#EAP-TLS|EAP-TLS]].

Upon detection of the new client ([[supplicant]]), the port on the switch (authenticator) will be enabled and set to the "unauthorized" state. In this state, only 802.1X traffic will be allowed; other traffic, such as DHCP and HTTP, will be blocked at the data link layer. The authenticator will send out the EAP-Request identity to the [[supplicant]], the [[supplicant]] will then send out the EAP-response packet that the authenticator will forward to the authenticating server. The authenticating server can accept or reject the EAP-Request; if it accepts the request, the authenticator will set the port to the "authorized" mode and normal traffic will be allowed. When the supplicant logs off, he will send an EAP-logoff message to the authenticator. The authenticator will then set the port to the "unauthorized" state, once again blocking all non-EAP traffic.

==External links==
* [http://www.ieee802.org/1/pages/802.1x.html IEEE page on 802.1X] 
* IEEE standard can be retrieved at no charge through the [http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/ GetIEEE802 program]: [http://standards.ieee.org/getieee802/download/802.1X-2001.pdf].

==See Also==
* [[Extensible Authentication Protocol]]
* [[PANA]]
* [[HOWTO]]s