These '''mailing lists''' are currently associated with the FreeRADIUS server project:

==Users list==

* [http://freeradius.org/list/users.html freeradius-users]

This list is for users of FreeRADIUS. If you are running the server, you should probably be subscribed to this list.

It's a mailman list, meaning you can subscribe to it using your web browser. Simply go to http://lists.freeradius.org/mailman/listinfo/freeradius-users and follow the instructions.	 
	 
You can also use email to subscribe, mail to:

mailto:freeradius-users-request@lists.freeradius.org

with the following line in the message body:

 subscribe freeradius-users

There is a public archive, available at:

http://lists.freeradius.org/pipermail/freeradius-users

==Devel list==

* [http://freeradius.org/list/devel.html freeradius-devel]

This list is for developers who are writing code for FreeRADIUS. While this list is open for anyone to subscribe, its content is very technical, and most people should not be subscribed to it.

It's a mailman list, meaning you can subscribe to it using your web browser. Simply go to http://lists.freeradius.org/mailman/listinfo/freeradius-devel/ and follow the instructions.	 
	 
You can also use email to subscribe, mail to:
	 
mailto:freeradius-devel-request@lists.freeradius.org
	 
with the following line in the message body:	 
	 
 subscribe freeradius-devel	 
	 
There is a public archive of freeradius-devel available at:
	 
http://lists.freeradius.org/pipermail/freeradius-devel

==Announce list==

* [http://freeradius.org/list/announce.html freeradius-announce]

This list is for announcements about FreeRADIUS, including new versions, and security issues.

==See also==

* [http://freeradius.org/list/ Up-to-date information about FreeRADIUS mailing lists]
