'''''radclient''''' is a radius client program included as part of [[FreeRADIUS]].  It can send arbitrary [[RADIUS]] packets to a [[RADIUS]] server, then shows the reply.  It can be used to test changes you made in the configuration of the radius server, or it can be used to monitor if a radius server is up.

radclient reads radius attribute/value pairs from it standard input, or from a file specified on the command line. It then encodes these attribute/value pairs using the dictionary, and sends them to the remote server.

The User-Password and CHAP-Password attributes are automatically encrypted before the packet is sent to the server.

==Command Line==
: Usage: radclient [options] server[:port] <command> [<secret>]
::; <command>  : One of auth, acct, status, coa, or disconnect.
::; -c count   : Send each packet 'count' times.
::; -d raddb   : Set dictionary directory.
::; -f file    : Read packets from file, not stdin.
::; -i id      : Set request id to 'id'.  Values may be 0..255
::; -n num     : Send N requests/s
::; -p num     : Send 'num' packets from a file in parallel.
::; -q         : Do not print anything out.
::; -r retries : If timeout, retry sending the packet 'retries' times.
::; -s         : Print out summary information of auth results.
::; -S file    : read secret from file, not command line.
::; -t timeout : Wait 'timeout' seconds before retrying (may be a floating point number).
::; -v         : Show program version information.
::; -x         : Debugging mode.

==Example==

 echo "User-Name = test" | /usr/local/bin/radclient localhost:1812 auth s3cr3t
 echo "User-Name=test,Password=mypass,Framed-Protocol=PPP " | /usr/local/bin/radclient localhost:1812 auth s3cr3t

==See Also==
* [[radiusclient]]