{{Default in the server source|raddb/radiusd.conf}}

Note that this example is based on 1.x and may not be completely accurate.

<pre>
##
## radiusd.conf	-- FreeRADIUS server configuration file.
##
##	http://www.freeradius.org/
##	$Id: radiusd.conf.in,v 1.234 2006/08/31 22:21:12 pnixon Exp $
##

#  	The location of other config files and
#  	logfiles are declared in this file
#
#  	Also general configuration for modules can be done
#  	in this file, it is exported through the API to
#  	modules that ask for it.
#
#	The configuration variables defined here are of the form ${foo}
#	They are local to this file, and do not change from request to
#	request.
#
#	The per-request variables are of the form %{Attribute-Name}, and
#	are taken from the values of the attribute in the incoming
#	request.  See 'doc/variables.txt' for more information.

prefix = /usr
exec_prefix = ${prefix}
sysconfdir = /etc
localstatedir = /var
sbindir = ${exec_prefix}/sbin
logdir = ${localstatedir}/log/radius
raddbdir = ${sysconfdir}/raddb
radacctdir = ${logdir}/radacct

#  Location of config and logfiles.
confdir = ${raddbdir}
run_dir = ${localstatedir}/run/radiusd

#
#  The logging messages for the server are appended to the
#  tail of this file.
#
log_file = ${logdir}/radius.log

#
#  Destination for log messages.  This can be one of:
#
#	files - log to ${log_file}, as defined above.
#	syslog - to syslog (see also the log{} section, below)
#	stdout - standard output
#	stderr - standard error.
#
#  The command-line option "-X" over-rides this option, and forces
#  logging to go to stdout.
#
log_destination = files

#
# libdir: Where to find the rlm_* modules.
#
#   This should be automatically set at configuration time.
#
#   If the server builds and installs, but fails at execution time
#   with an 'undefined symbol' error, then you can use the libdir
#   directive to work around the problem.
#
#   The cause is usually that a library has been installed on your
#   system in a place where the dynamic linker CANNOT find it.  When
#   executing as root (or another user), your personal environment MAY
#   be set up to allow the dynamic linker to find the library.  When
#   executing as a daemon, FreeRADIUS MAY NOT have the same
#   personalized configuration.
#
#   To work around the problem, find out which library contains that symbol,
#   and add the directory containing that library to the end of 'libdir',
#   with a colon separating the directory names.  NO spaces are allowed.
#
#   e.g. libdir = /usr/local/lib:/opt/package/lib
#
#   You can also try setting the LD_LIBRARY_PATH environment variable
#   in a script which starts the server.
#
#   If that does not work, then you can re-configure and re-build the
#   server to NOT use shared libraries, via:
#
#	./configure --disable-shared
#	make
#	make install
#
libdir = /usr/lib/freeradius

#  pidfile: Where to place the PID of the RADIUS server.
#
#  The server may be signalled while it's running by using this
#  file.
#
#  This file is written when ONLY running in daemon mode.
#
#  e.g.:  kill -HUP `cat /var/run/radiusd/radiusd.pid`
#
pidfile = ${run_dir}/radiusd.pid


# user/group: The name (or #number) of the user/group to run radiusd as.
#
#   If these are commented out, the server will run as the user/group
#   that started it.  In order to change to a different user/group, you
#   MUST be root ( or have root privleges ) to start the server.
#
#   We STRONGLY recommend that you run the server with as few permissions
#   as possible.  That is, if you're not using shadow passwords, the
#   user and group items below should be set to 'nobody'.
#
#    On SCO (ODT 3) use "user = nouser" and "group = nogroup".
#
#  NOTE that some kernels refuse to setgid(group) when the value of
#  (unsigned)group is above 60000; don't use group nobody on these systems!
#
#  On systems with shadow passwords, you might have to set 'group = shadow'
#  for the server to be able to read the shadow password file.  If you can
#  authenticate users while in debug mode, but not in daemon mode, it may be
#  that the debugging mode server is running as a user that can read the
#  shadow info, and the user listed below can not.
#
user = radiusd
group = radiusd

#  max_request_time: The maximum time (in seconds) to handle a request.
#
#  Requests which take more time than this to process may be killed, and
#  a REJECT message is returned.
#
#  WARNING: If you notice that requests take a long time to be handled,
#  then this MAY INDICATE a bug in the server, in one of the modules
#  used to handle a request, OR in your local configuration.
#
#  This problem is most often seen when using an SQL database.  If it takes
#  more than a second or two to receive an answer from the SQL database,
#  then it probably means that you haven't indexed the database.  See your
#  SQL server documentation for more information.
#
#  Useful range of values: 5 to 120
#
max_request_time = 30

#  delete_blocked_requests: If the request takes MORE THAN 'max_request_time'
#  to be handled, then maybe the server should delete it.
#
#  If you're running in threaded, or thread pool mode, this setting
#  should probably be 'no'.  Setting it to 'yes' when using a threaded
#  server MAY cause the server to crash!
#
delete_blocked_requests = no

#  cleanup_delay: The time to wait (in seconds) before cleaning up
#  a reply which was sent to the NAS.
#
#  The RADIUS request is normally cached internally for a short period
#  of time, after the reply is sent to the NAS.  The reply packet may be
#  lost in the network, and the NAS will not see it.  The NAS will then
#  re-send the request, and the server will respond quickly with the
#  cached reply.
#
#  If this value is set too low, then duplicate requests from the NAS
#  MAY NOT be detected, and will instead be handled as seperate requests.
#
#  If this value is set too high, then the server will cache too many
#  requests, and some new requests may get blocked.  (See 'max_requests'.)
#
#  Useful range of values: 2 to 10
#
cleanup_delay = 5

#  max_requests: The maximum number of requests which the server keeps
#  track of.  This should be 256 multiplied by the number of clients.
#  e.g. With 4 clients, this number should be 1024.
#
#  If this number is too low, then when the server becomes busy,
#  it will not respond to any new requests, until the 'cleanup_delay'
#  time has passed, and it has removed the old requests.
#
#  If this number is set too high, then the server will use a bit more
#  memory for no real benefit.
#
#  If you aren't sure what it should be set to, it's better to set it
#  too high than too low.  Setting it to 1000 per client is probably
#  the highest it should be.
#
#  Useful range of values: 256 to infinity
#
max_requests = 1024

#  listen: Make the server listen on a particular IP address, and send
#  replies out from that address. This directive is most useful for
#  hosts with multiple IP addresses on one interface.
#
#  If you want the server to listen on additional addresses, or on
#  additionnal ports, you can use multiple "listen" sections.
#
#  Each section make the server listen for only one type of packet,
#  therefore authentication and accounting have to be configured in
#  different sections.
#
#  The server ignore all "listen" section if you are using '-i' and '-p'
#  on the command line.
#
listen {
	#  IP address on which to listen.
	#  Allowed values are:
	#	dotted quad (1.2.3.4)
	#       hostname    (radius.example.com)
	#       wildcard    (*)
	ipaddr = *

	#  OR, you can use an IPv6 address, but not both
	#  at the same time.
#	ipv6addr = ::	# any.  ::1 == localhost

	#  Port on which to listen.
	#  Allowed values are:
	#	integer port number (1812)
	#	0 means "use /etc/services for the proper port"
	port = 0

	#  Type of packets to listen for.
	#  Allowed values are:
	#	auth	listen for authentication packets
	#	acct	listen for accounting packets
	#
	type = auth

	#  Some systems support binding to an interface, in addition
	#  to the IP address.  This feature isn't strictly necessary,
	#  but for sites with many IP addresses on one interface,
	#  it's useful to say "listen on all addresses for eth0".
	#
	#  If your system does not support this feature, you will
	#  get an error if you try to use it.
	#
#	interface = eth0

	#  Per-socket lists of clients.  This is a very useful feature.
	#
	#  The name here is a reference to a section elsewhere in
	#  radiusd.conf, or clients.conf.  Having the name as
	#  a reference allows multiple sockets to use the same
	#  set of clients.
	#
	#  If this configuration is used, then the global list of clients
	#  is IGNORED for this "listen" section.  Take care configuring
	#  this feature, to ensure you don't accidentally disable a
	#  client you need.
	#
	#  See clients.conf for the configuration of "per_socket_clients".
	#
#	clients = per_socket_clients
}

#  This second "listen" section is for listening on the accounting
#  port, too.
#
listen {
	ipaddr = *
#	ipv6addr = ::
	port = 0
	type = acct
#	interface = eth0
#	clients = per_socket_clients
}

#  hostname_lookups: Log the names of clients or just their IP addresses
#  e.g., www.freeradius.org (on) or 206.47.27.232 (off).
#
#  The default is 'off' because it would be overall better for the net
#  if people had to knowingly turn this feature on, since enabling it
#  means that each client request will result in AT LEAST one lookup
#  request to the nameserver.   Enabling hostname_lookups will also
#  mean that your server may stop randomly for 30 seconds from time
#  to time, if the DNS requests take too long.
#
#  Turning hostname lookups off also means that the server won't block
#  for 30 seconds, if it sees an IP address which has no name associated
#  with it.
#
#  allowed values: {no, yes}
#
hostname_lookups = no

#  Core dumps are a bad thing.  This should only be set to 'yes'
#  if you're debugging a problem with the server.
#
#  allowed values: {no, yes}
#
allow_core_dumps = no

#  Regular expressions
#
#  These items are set at configure time.  If they're set to "yes",
#  then setting them to "no" turns off regular expression support.
#
#  If they're set to "no" at configure time, then setting them to "yes"
#  WILL NOT WORK.  It will give you an error.
#
regular_expressions	= yes
extended_expressions	= yes

#
#  Logging section.  The various "log_*" configuration items
#  will eventually be moved here.
#
log {
	#
	#  Which syslog facility to use, if ${log_destination} == "syslog"
	#
	#  The exact values permitted here are OS-dependent.  You probably
	#  don't want to change this.
	#
	syslog_facility = daemon
}

#  Log the full User-Name attribute, as it was found in the request.
#
# allowed values: {no, yes}
#
log_stripped_names = no

#  Log authentication requests to the log file.
#
#  allowed values: {no, yes}
#
log_auth = no

#  Log passwords with the authentication requests.
#  log_auth_badpass  - logs password if it's rejected
#  log_auth_goodpass - logs password if it's correct
#
#  allowed values: {no, yes}
#
log_auth_badpass = no
log_auth_goodpass = no

#  The program to execute to do concurrency checks.
checkrad = ${sbindir}/checkrad

# SECURITY CONFIGURATION
#
#  There may be multiple methods of attacking on the server.  This
#  section holds the configuration items which minimize the impact
#  of those attacks
#
security {
	#
	#  max_attributes: The maximum number of attributes
	#  permitted in a RADIUS packet.  Packets which have MORE
	#  than this number of attributes in them will be dropped.
	#
	#  If this number is set too low, then no RADIUS packets
	#  will be accepted.
	#
	#  If this number is set too high, then an attacker may be
	#  able to send a small number of packets which will cause
	#  the server to use all available memory on the machine.
	#
	#  Setting this number to 0 means "allow any number of attributes"
	max_attributes = 200

	#
	#  reject_delay: When sending an Access-Reject, it can be
	#  delayed for a few seconds.  This may help slow down a DoS
	#  attack.  It also helps to slow down people trying to brute-force
	#  crack a users password.
	#
	#  Setting this number to 0 means "send rejects immediately"
	#
	#  If this number is set higher than 'cleanup_delay', then the
	#  rejects will be sent at 'cleanup_delay' time, when the request
	#  is deleted from the internal cache of requests.
	#
	#  Useful ranges: 1 to 5
	reject_delay = 1

	#
	#  status_server: Whether or not the server will respond
	#  to Status-Server requests.
	#
	#  Normally this should be set to "no", because they're useless.
	#  See: http://www.freeradius.org/rfc/rfc2865.html#Keep-Alives
	#
	#  However, certain NAS boxes may require them.	
	#
	#  When sent a Status-Server message, the server responds with
	#  an Access-Accept packet, containing a Reply-Message attribute,
	#  which is a string describing how long the server has been
	#  running.
	#
	status_server = no
}

# PROXY CONFIGURATION
#
#  proxy_requests: Turns proxying of RADIUS requests on or off.
#
#  The server has proxying turned on by default.  If your system is NOT
#  set up to proxy requests to another server, then you can turn proxying
#  off here.  This will save a small amount of resources on the server.
#
#  If you have proxying turned off, and your configuration files say
#  to proxy a request, then an error message will be logged.
#
#  To disable proxying, change the "yes" to "no", and comment the
#  $INCLUDE line.
#
#  allowed values: {no, yes}
#
proxy_requests  = yes
$INCLUDE  ${confdir}/proxy.conf


# CLIENTS CONFIGURATION
#
#  Client configuration is defined in "clients.conf".  
#

#  The 'clients.conf' file contains all of the information from the old
#  'clients' and 'naslist' configuration files.  We recommend that you
#  do NOT use 'client's or 'naslist', although they are still
#  supported.
#
#  Anything listed in 'clients.conf' will take precedence over the
#  information from the old-style configuration files.
#
$INCLUDE  ${confdir}/clients.conf


# SNMP CONFIGURATION
#
#  Snmp configuration is only valid if SNMP support was enabled
#  at compile time.
#
#  To enable SNMP querying of the server, set the value of the
#  'snmp' attribute to 'yes'
#
snmp	= no
$INCLUDE  ${confdir}/snmp.conf


# THREAD POOL CONFIGURATION
#
#  The thread pool is a long-lived group of threads which
#  take turns (round-robin) handling any incoming requests.
#
#  You probably want to have a few spare threads around,
#  so that high-load situations can be handled immediately.  If you
#  don't have any spare threads, then the request handling will
#  be delayed while a new thread is created, and added to the pool.
#
#  You probably don't want too many spare threads around,
#  otherwise they'll be sitting there taking up resources, and
#  not doing anything productive.
#
#  The numbers given below should be adequate for most situations.
#
thread pool {
	#  Number of servers to start initially --- should be a reasonable
	#  ballpark figure.
	start_servers = 5

	#  Limit on the total number of servers running.
	#
	#  If this limit is ever reached, clients will be LOCKED OUT, so it
	#  should NOT BE SET TOO LOW.  It is intended mainly as a brake to
	#  keep a runaway server from taking the system with it as it spirals
	#  down...
	#
	#  You may find that the server is regularly reaching the
	#  'max_servers' number of threads, and that increasing
	#  'max_servers' doesn't seem to make much difference.
	#
	#  If this is the case, then the problem is MOST LIKELY that
	#  your back-end databases are taking too long to respond, and
	#  are preventing the server from responding in a timely manner.
	#
	#  The solution is NOT do keep increasing the 'max_servers'
	#  value, but instead to fix the underlying cause of the
	#  problem: slow database, or 'hostname_lookups=yes'.
	#
	#  For more information, see 'max_request_time', above.
	#
	max_servers = 32

	#  Server-pool size regulation.  Rather than making you guess
	#  how many servers you need, FreeRADIUS dynamically adapts to
	#  the load it sees, that is, it tries to maintain enough
	#  servers to handle the current load, plus a few spare
	#  servers to handle transient load spikes.
	#
	#  It does this by periodically checking how many servers are
	#  waiting for a request.  If there are fewer than
	#  min_spare_servers, it creates a new spare.  If there are
	#  more than max_spare_servers, some of the spares die off.
	#  The default values are probably OK for most sites.
	#
	min_spare_servers = 3
	max_spare_servers = 10

	#  There may be memory leaks or resource allocation problems with
	#  the server.  If so, set this value to 300 or so, so that the
	#  resources will be cleaned up periodically.
	#
	#  This should only be necessary if there are serious bugs in the
	#  server which have not yet been fixed.
	#
	#  '0' is a special value meaning 'infinity', or 'the servers never
	#  exit'
	max_requests_per_server = 0
}

# MODULE CONFIGURATION
#
#  The names and configuration of each module is located in this section.
#
#  After the modules are defined here, they may be referred to by name,
#  in other sections of this configuration file.
#
modules {
	#
	#  Each module has a configuration as follows:
	#
	#	name [ instance ] {
	#		config_item = value
	#		...
	#	}
	#
	#  The 'name' is used to load the 'rlm_name' library
	#  which implements the functionality of the module.
	#
	#  The 'instance' is optional.  To have two different instances
	#  of a module, it first must be referred to by 'name'.
	#  The different copies of the module are then created by
	#  inventing two 'instance' names, e.g. 'instance1' and 'instance2'
	#
	#  The instance names can then be used in later configuration
	#  INSTEAD of the original 'name'.  See the 'radutmp' configuration
	#  below for an example.
	#

        #  As of 2.0.5, most of the module configurations are in a
        #  sub-directory.  Files matching the regex /[a-zA-Z0-9_.]+/   
        #  are loaded.  The modules are initialized ONLY if they are   
        #  referenced in a processing section, such as authorize,   
        #  authenticate, accounting, pre/post-proxy, etc.
        #
        $INCLUDE ${confdir}/modules/

	#  Extensible Authentication Protocol
	#
	#  For all EAP related authentications.
	#  Now in another file, because it is very large.
	#
$INCLUDE ${confdir}/eap.conf


	#  Include another file that has the SQL-related configuration.
	#  This is another file only because it tends to be big.
	#
	$INCLUDE  ${confdir}/sql.conf

}

# Instantiation
#
#  This section orders the loading of the modules.  Modules
#  listed here will get loaded BEFORE the later sections like
#  authorize, authenticate, etc. get examined.
#
#  This section is not strictly needed.  When a section like
#  authorize refers to a module, it's automatically loaded and
#  initialized.  However, some modules may not be listed in any
#  of the following sections, so they can be listed here.
#
#  Also, listing modules here ensures that you have control over
#  the order in which they are initalized.  If one module needs
#  something defined by another module, you can list them in order
#  here, and ensure that the configuration will be OK.
#
instantiate {
	#
	#  Allows the execution of external scripts.
	#  The entire command line (and output) must fit into 253 bytes.
	#
	#  e.g. Framed-Pool = `%{exec:/bin/echo foo}`
	exec

	#
	#  The expression module doesn't do authorization,
	#  authentication, or accounting.  It only does dynamic
	#  translation, of the form:
	#
	#	Session-Timeout = `%{expr:2 + 3}`
	#
	#  So the module needs to be instantiated, but CANNOT be
	#  listed in any other section.  See 'doc/rlm_expr' for
	#  more information.
	#
	expr

	#
	# We add the counter module here so that it registers
	# the check-name attribute before any module which sets
	# it
#	daily
	expiration
	logintime

	# subsections here can be thought of as "virtual" modules.
	#
	# e.g. If you have two redundant SQL servers, and you want to
	# use them in the authorize and accounting sections, you could
	# place a "redundant" block in each section, containing the
	# exact same text.  Or, you could uncomment the following
	# lines, and list "redundant_sql" in the authorize and
	# accounting sections.
	#
	#redundant redundant_sql {
	#	sql1
	#	sql2
	#}
}

######################################################################
#
#       Policies that can be applied in multiple places are listed
#       globally.  That way, they can be defined once, and referred
#       to multiple times.
#
######################################################################
$INCLUDE policy.conf

######################################################################
#
#       Load virtual servers.
#       
#       This next $INCLUDE line loads files in the directory that
#       match the regular expression: /[a-zA-Z0-9_.]+/
#
#       It allows you to define new virtual servers simply by placing
#       a file into the raddb/sites-enabled/ directory.
#
$INCLUDE sites-enabled/
 
######################################################################
#
#       All of the other configuration sections like "authorize {}",  
#       "authenticate {}", "accounting {}", have been moved to the
#       the file:
#
#               raddb/sites-available/default
#       
#       This is the "default" virtual server that has the same
#       configuration as in version 1.0.x and 1.1.x.  The default
#       installation enables this virtual server.  You should 
#       edit it to create policies for your local site.
#
#       For more documentation on virtual servers, see:
#       
#               raddb/sites-available/README
#
######################################################################

</pre>

==See Also==

* [[CONFIGURATION FILES]]
