The FreeRADIUS server works with any reasonably well-written RADIUS client.

The FreeRADIUS server software package includes several tools to assist in testing and using the server. They are:

* [[Radclient]] - A utility to send arbitrary RADIUS packets to a RADIUS server, and show the reply
* [[Radtest]] - A tool testing the FreeRADIUS server by querying it directly with requests

[[Radiusclient]] is a framework and library for writing RADIUS Clients, BSD licensed, cared for by the FreeRADIUS project.

Additionally FreeRADIUS Server is known to work with the following clients:

==ChilliSpot / [http://coova.org/wiki/index.php/CoovaChilli CoovaChilli]==
[http://www.chillispot.org/ ChilliSpot] is an open source access controller for wired or wireless LAN access points. It is used for authenticating users of a wireless LAN. It supports web based login by way of a captive portal, which is today's standard for public HotSpots, and it supports Wireless Protected Access (WPA), which is the standard for wireless security. [[Authentication]], [[Authorization]] and [[Accounting]] ([[AAA]]) is handled by your favorite radius server.

The ChilliSpot website is no longer active as the original author has abandoned the project.

[http://coova.org/wiki/index.php/CoovaChilli CoovaChilli] is an active project based on ChilliSpot, maintained by a ChilliSpot contributor, with many new features, fixes, and support. Note, however, you may require the ''swapoctets'' option when replacing your ChilliSpot installation. See [[NAS Accounting Differences]] for details.

==JRadius==
[http://jradius.net/ JRadius] provides a full featured Java RADIUS client, in addition to a Java/FreeRADIUS module framework. The distribution also comes with a [http://coova.org/wiki/index.php/JRadius/Simulator RADIUS Simulator] testing tool with a graphical user interface.

==mod_auth_radius==
[http://www.freeradius.org/mod_auth_radius/ mod_auth_radius] is an Apache RADIUS authentication module. It allows any Apache web-server to become a RADIUS client for authentication and accounting requests.

==pam_radius_auth==
[http://www.freeradius.org/pam_radius_auth/ pam_radius_auth] is a PAM to RADIUS authentication module. It allows any PAM-capable machine to become a RADIUS client for authentication and accounting requests.

==Pyrad==
[http://www.wiggy.net/code/pyrad/ pyrad] is a Python implementation of a RADIUS client as described in RFC2865. It takes care of all the details like building RADIUS packets, sending them and decoding responses.

==Radiusclient==
[[Radiusclient]] is a framework and library for writing RADIUS clients which used to live at http://www.cityline.net/~lf/radius/ but has now been adopted by the FreeRADIUS Project.

It contains a flexible RADIUS aware login replacement, a command line program to send RADIUS accounting records and a utility to query the status of a (Merit) RADIUS server. All these programs are based on a library which lets you develop a RADIUS-aware application in less than 50 lines of C code. It is highly portable and runs on Linux, many BSD variants and Solaris.

==Radiusclient-ng==
[http://developer.berlios.de/projects/radiusclient-ng/ Radiusclient-ng] is a portable, easy-to-use and standard compliant library suitable for developing free and commercial software that need support for a RADIUS protocol (RFC 2138 and RFC 2139).

It contains a flexible RADIUS aware login replacement, a command line program to send RADIUS accounting records and a utility to query the status of a (Merit) RADIUS server. All these programs are based on a library which lets you develop a RADIUS-aware application in less than 50 lines of C code. It is highly portable and runs on Linux, many BSD variants and Solaris.

This is the next generation fork of the unmaintained "radiusclient", and is used as the basis of the RADIUS support in [http://www.iptel.org/ser SER], [http://www.openser.org/ OpenSER] and [http://www.b2bua.org/ Sippy B2BUA].

The project has moved under FreeRADIUS umbrella as a FreeRADIUS client package in early 2008 and is no longer being developed as a separate entity.  The last release is 0.5.6 and is still available for compatibility and historical purposes.

==PHP Radius Extension==
Open source PECL extension based on libradius from FreeBSD, has full support for Radius Authentication (RFC 2865) and Radius Accounting (RFC 2866). Though not bundled with PHP by default, it can be downloaded using the pecl installer, or downloaded as a precompiled library for windows (php_radius.dll).

See http://php.net/manual/en/ref.radius.php for current documentation.

==Radlogin==

[[Radlogin]] is a /bin/login replacement which gets called by a getty to log in a user and to setup the user's login environment.

==WPA Supplicant==

* [[WPA Supplicant]] - A free software implementation of an IEEE 802.11i supplicant for Linux, BSD and Microsoft Windows

==Dialup admin==

[[Dialup admin]] is a web administration interface for the FreeRADIUS server.
This is PHP software that is cared for by the FreeRADIUS Project.
It is currently shipped with freeradius-server.

==See Also==
* [[EAP Clients]]
* [[Other RADIUS Servers]]