The '''rlm_mschap''' module enables local [[MS-CHAP]] authentication.

{{Default in the server source|src/modules/rlm_mschap/}}

==Configuration==

{{Default in the server source|raddb/modules/mschap}}

<pre>
	# Microsoft CHAP authentication
	#
	#  This module supports MS-CHAP and MS-CHAPv2 authentication.
	#  It also enforces the SMB-Account-Ctrl attribute.
	#
	mschap {
		#
		#  As of 0.9, the mschap module does NOT support
		#  reading from /etc/smbpasswd.
		#
		#  If you are using /etc/smbpasswd, see the 'passwd'
		#  module for an example of how to use /etc/smbpasswd

		# if use_mppe is not set to no mschap will
		# add MS-CHAP-MPPE-Keys for MS-CHAPv1 and
		# MS-MPPE-Recv-Key/MS-MPPE-Send-Key for MS-CHAPv2
		#
		#use_mppe = no

		# if mppe is enabled require_encryption makes
		# encryption moderate
		#
		#require_encryption = yes

		# require_strong always requires 128 bit key
		# encryption
		#
		#require_strong = yes

		# Windows sends us a username in the form of
		# DOMAIN\user, but sends the challenge response
		# based on only the user portion.  This hack
		# corrects for that incorrect behavior.
		#
		#with_ntdomain_hack = no

		# The module can perform authentication itself, OR
		# use a Windows Domain Controller.  This configuration
		# directive tells the module to call the ntlm_auth
		# program, which will do the authentication, and return
		# the NT-Key.  Note that you MUST have "winbindd" and
		# "nmbd" running on the local machine for ntlm_auth
		# to work.  See the ntlm_auth program documentation
		# for details.
		#
		# Watch for %{mschap:User-Name} vs %{User-Name}: the 
		# first will change machine authentication from 
		# "host/machine.domain.name" to "machine$", as it
		# should be with AD.
		#
		# Be VERY careful when editing the following line!
		#
		#ntlm_auth = "/path/to/ntlm_auth --request-nt-key --username=%{Stripped-User-Name:-%{mschap:User-Name:-None}} --challenge=%{mschap:Challenge:-00} --nt-response=%{mschap:NT-Response:-00}"
	}
</pre>