DIAMETER
========

The Diameter base protocol is intended to provide an [[Authentication|glossary/Authentication]], [[Authorization|glossary/Authorization]] and [[Accounting|glossary/Accounting]] ([[AAA|glossary/AAA]]) framework for applications such as network access or IP mobility.  Diameter is also intended to work in both local Authentication, Authorization & Accounting and roaming situations.  This document specifies the message format, transport, error reporting, accounting and security services to be used by all Diameter applications.  The Diameter base application needs to be supported by all Diameter implementations.

History
--------

This is the proposed successor of the [[RADIUS|glossary/RADIUS]] protocol.

Protocol dependencies
---------------------------

* TCP: Typically, DIAMETER uses TCP as its transport protocol. The well known TCP port for DIAMETER traffic is 3868.
* SCTP: Typically, DIAMETER uses SCTP as its transport protocol. The well known SCTP port for DIAMETER traffic is 3868.

External links
----------------

* [[Diameter Base Protocol|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3588.txt]]
* [[RFC 3589|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc3589.txt]] - Diameter Command Codes for Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) Release 5
* [[RFC 4004|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4004.txt]] - Diameter Mobile IPv4 Application
* [[RFC 4005|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4005.txt]] - Diameter Network Access Server Application
* [[RFC 4006|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4006.txt]] - Diameter Credit-control Application
* [[RFC 4072|http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc4072.txt]] - Diameter Extensible Authentication Protocol (EAP) Application
* [[aaa-parameters|http://www.iana.org/assignments/aaa-parameters]]
* [[IETF aaa-charter|http://www.ietf.org/html.charters/aaa-charter.html]]

Internet-Drafts
-----------------

* [[Internet Draft Search|http://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-ietf-dime]]

Diameter implementations
-------------------------------

* FreeDiameter
* Open Diameter
* [[OpenBloX GPL Java Diameter|http://www.openaaa.org]]

See Also
----------

* [[AAA|glossary/AAA]]
* [[RADIUS|glossary/RADIUS]]
* PANA