The FreeRADIUS Project is the result of the work done by a large number of people. We would like to publicly thank the following major contributors:

;Adrian Pavlykevych
:LDAP module.

;Alan Curry
:Contributed many patches for proxying, replication, realm support.

;Alan DeKok ([[User:Aland]])
:FreeRADIUS Project Lead. Registered and maintains [http://www.freeradius.org/ freeradius.org].  Wrote the module code.  Made the server threaded.  Maintains the autoconf and libtool scripts for the server. Rewrote most of the server core.

;Brandon Lee Poyner
:Netscape-MTA-MD5 authentication module.

;Chris Brotsos
:Memory allocation debugging and proxy enhancements.

;Chris Parker
:Configuration parser enhancements. 'rlm_attr_filter' module. proxy enhancements. FreeRADIUS Client embedded mode and other enhancements.

;Jeff Carneal, Apex Internet Services, Inc.
:Wrote the caching support for the Unix module.

;Jochen Friedrich
:SMUX / SNMP support.

;Kevin Bonner ([[User:KevinBonner]])
:Contributes significantly to the mailing list and wiki

;Kostas Kalevras
:Contributed the 'dialup_admin' PHP server administration code.

;Miquel van Smoorenburg
:Wrote the original Cistron server, and started the FreeRADIUS source tree.

;Mike Machado
:Author of the SQL module.

;Miguel a.l. Paraz
:Wrote the original code which was the basis for the PAM module.

;Nathan Neulinger
:Kerberos authentication module.

;[http://peternixon.net Peter Nixon] ([[User:peter]])
:Maintains [[rlm_sqlippool]] and hacks on other [[SQL]] related code, maintains openSUSE [[binary packages]] and provides hosting for website, wiki and ftp.