Coding standards
----------------

The goal is to have consistent, clear code.  All code should share a common style, format, choice of function / variable names, etc.  This means that people looking at the code see the *code*, and not the wildly different coding styles.

Code should be commented.  There are over 100K LoC in the server, and it's impossible to always remember *why* things are done the way they are.  The comments should explain the choices behind the code, the goal, or philosophy, or the "gotcha's".

Function documentation should be doxygen style.  Below is an example of doxygen function documentation, use it as a guide when writing your own.

```c
/** Simple wrapper to decide whether an IP value is v4 or v6 and call the appropriate parser
 *
 * @param[out] out	Where to write the parsed ip address.
 * @param[in] value	to parse.
 * @param[in] inlen	Length of value, if value is \0 terminated inlen may be -1.
 * @param[in] resolve	If true and value doesn't look like an IP address, try and resolve value as
 *	a hostname.
 * @return
 *	- 0 if ip address was parsed successfully.
 *	- -1 on failure.
 */
int fr_pton(fr_ipaddr_t *out, char const *value, ssize_t inlen, bool resolve)
{
}
```

Function naming conventions
===========================

Verb / noun order
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Nouns should always precede verbs ``<prefix>_<noun>_<verb>[_<verb qualifiers>]``.

```c
fr_request_alloc()
fr_dict_find_by_name()
python_interp_exec()
```

**Bad**
```c
do_python()
rest_parse_pairs()
```

Name component separation 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Name components should be separated by underscores.

**Good**
```c
fr_pair_find
```

**Bad**
```c
frPairFind
frpairfind
fr_pairfind
```

Variable names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Variable names should be unambiguous, and should describe the thing they represent in plain english.  Contractions should be avoided in the majority of cases, especially if there are multiple ways of writing them.

If acronyms must be used, they should usually be formed of the first letter of each of the name components of the structure they represent.

**Good**
There's internal debate about which one of these is more appropriate, this is one of the few cases where you'll likely see inconsistency, if in doubt, stick with whatever format is used in the source file you're editing.
```c
eap_session_t *eap_session;
eap_session_t *es;
```

**Bad**
```c
eap_session_t *eps;
eap_session_t *eap_sess;
```

Function names
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Should describe the operation they perform in plain english.  Contractions should be avoided in the majority of cases, especially if there are multiple ways of writing them.

Generally function names should not contain acronyms, unless they are in general use, required by a protocol, or match a common acronym used for variables representing a particular type of structure (``da`` is a very common one here, and expands to dictionary attribute, or ``fr_dict_attr_t``.

Search functions will generally be in the format of ``<prefix>_<noun>_<preposition>_<noun>``, e.g. ``fr_pair_find_by_da``.

Conversion or wrapping functions will generally be in the same form, but with ``from`` and ``to`` used as the preposition, e.g. ``fr_tmpl_from_str``.  Where the preposition is prefixed with an 'a' (alloc) it means the resulting object will be allocated on the heap.

In all cases unnecessary acronyms and contractions should be avoided, i.e. if you're using calling the function once, and the rest of the body of the code you're working in doesn't contain contractions or acronyms, don't use then.

**Good**
```c
fr_pair_find_by_num
fr_packet_list_alloc
map_proc_find_by_name
fr_pair_afrom_da
```

**Bad**
```c
fr_pair_search  	/* What are we searching with? */
fr_packet_list  	/* No idea what action is being performed */
proc_find_by_name	/* Proc is ambiguous - Stands for processor in this context, but what kind of processor? */
fr_pair_alloc_with_da   /* Non standard preposition */
mod_ms_aa               /* Gratuitous and unnecessary use of non-standard and ambiguous acronyms */
```

Prefixes / namespaces
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Protocol library ``fr_``
""""""""""""""""""""""""
All functions in the protocol library should be prefixed with ``fr``. The rationale is that as libfreeradius is a library intended to be used by 3rd party applications it requires a namespace to avoid conflicts.

Server library ``<group>_``
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""
Functions in the server library should not have a global prefix, but should use a common prefix i.e. functions which manipulate value pairs should use the ``pair_`` prefix, dictionary functions should use the ``dict_`` prefix.

Modules
"""""""
Public functions should use the ``mod_`` prefix, e.g. ``mod_authorize``, ``mod_authentication``, ``mod_instantiate``. If the module uses its own library, those functions should be prefixed with the name of the module e.g. ``python_``, ``rest_``, ``eap_``.

Ideally, all of the functions in a module should be ``static``.  If they cannot be that, the function name prefixes given above are *required*.

Instantiation and destruction
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Library and structure initialisations functions should use the verb ``init``. Functions that initialise structures should expect them to contain garbage values (be uninitialised).

Structure allocation functions should use the verb ``alloc``. ``create`` should not be used.

Explicit ``free`` or ``destroy`` functions should be avoided, and talloc destructors used wherever possible. Talloc destructor functions should be static and be prefixed with ``_`` to mark them as private e.g. ``_fr_pair_free()``

Callbacks
^^^^^^^^^

Callbacks should be prefixed with a ``_`` to mark them as private e.g. ``int _my_comparator(int a, int b)``.

Return types
============

Boolean
^^^^^^^

``bool`` is used where the function is answering a true/false question (is a predicate). A good example is the ``is_whitespace`` function, which checks if the entire string is made up of whitespace.

```c
bool is_whitespace(char const *value)
{
	do {
		if (!isspace(*value)) return false;
	} while (*++value);

	return true;
}
```

Integer
^^^^^^^
``int`` should be used for most functions. Negative integers indicate failure, zero indicates success, positive integers indicate success with caveats.

If you find a function returns significant (>= 4) numbers of different integer values, you should define an enum type so that it's clear in calling code what the different values mean.

```c
typedef enum {
	FUNC_RCODE_SUCCESS = 0,
	FUNC_RCODE_NO_MEMORY = -1,
	FUNC_RCODE_BAD_ARGUMENTS_0 = -2,
	FUNC_RCODE_BAD_ARGUMENTS_1 = -3
} func_rcode_t;

func_rcode_t my_function(int arg0, int arg1)
{
	void *mem;

	mem = talloc(NULL, void);
	if (!mem) return FUNC_RCODE_NO_MEMORY;

	if (arg0 > 10) return FUNC_RCODE_BAD_ARGUMENTS_0;
	if (arg1 > 10) return FUNC_RCODE_BAD_ARGUMENTS_1;

	return FUNC_RCODE_SUCCESS;
}
```

Pointer
^^^^^^^

Used only for allocation functions where there's a single simple failure mode (in which case NULL is returned).

```c
my_structure_t *simple_memory_alloc(TALLOC_CTX *ctx, int arg0, int arg1)
{
	return talloc(ctx, my_structure_t);
}
```

For more complicated failures the function should return an integer, and write a pointer to the allocated memory via one of the arguments.

```c
int complicated_memory_alloc(TALLOC_CTX *ctx, my_structure_t **out, int arg0, int arg1)
{
	my_structure_t *structure.

	if (arg0 == 0) {
		fr_strerror_printf("Invalid parameter, arg0 must be greater than 0");
		return -2;
	}	

	structure = talloc(ctx, my_structure_t);
	if (!structure) return -1;

	return 0;
}
```

Argument order
==============

Arguments should be in the following order

- TALLOC_CTX (if used).
- Arguments that return data to the caller ([out] arguments in doxygen parlence).
- Arguments for passing data to the function.

For modules the instance data pointer should be directly before the ``REQUEST *`` pointer.

Code style
==========

FreeRADIUS code style is very similar to 1TBS (one true brace style) with two major differences.

- Bodies may be collapsed i.e. ``if (foo) bar();`` is acceptable.
- Case statements don't require indentation.

**Good**
```c
if (foo) bar();
```
```c
if (foo) {
	bar();
	baz();
}
```
```c
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++) bar();
```
```c
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++) {
	bar();
	baz();
}
```
```c
switch (foo) {
case 'bar':
	break;

case 'baz':
	break;
}
```

**Bad**
```c
if (foo)
	bar();
```
```c
if (foo)
	bar();
else
	baz();
```
```c
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++)
	bar();
```
```c
switch (foo)
{
	case 'bar':
		break;

	case 'baz':
		break;
}
```

If in doubt the files below are good examples to follow:

- https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/blob/master/src/modules/rlm_ldap/rlm_ldap.c
- https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/blob/master/src/lib/util/dict.c
- https://github.com/FreeRADIUS/freeradius-server/blob/master/src/lib/protocol/radius/encode.c


No trailing whitespace, newline at the end of the file
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Many editors support trimming trailing whitespace and adding a newline at the end of the file automatically.

You should enable these features.

Arguments align with the end of the function name
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

This is true for function declarations, definitions, and calls. Grouping related arguments together on the same line is also preferred.

**Good**
```c
int my_function_with_lots_of_args(fr_ipaddr_t *src, uint16_t src_port,
				  fr_ipaddr_t *dst, uint16_t dst_port,
				  struct timeval timeout)
{
	return 0;
}
```

**Bad**
```c
int my_function_with_lots_of_args(fr_ipaddr_t *src, uint16_t src_port, fr_ipaddr_t *dst, uint16_t dst_port,
	struct timeval timeout)
{
	return 0;
}

```

Hard break at 120 columns
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

It's not 1978, 80x24 VT100 terminals have long been consigned to the electronics recycling bin (hopefully).

We believe code is perfectly readable up to 120 columns, that and over application of hard line breaking at 80 columns reduces code readability instead of increasing it.

Strings should also be broken at 120 columns for consistency.

Always collapse or omit bodies (where possible)
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If a condition or loop and its body can be collapsed onto a single line, or omitted, then do so.

**Good**
```c
if (foo && bar) baz();
```
```c
while (foo()) baz();
```
```c
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++);
```

**Bad**
```c
if (foo && bar) {
	baz();
}
```
```c
if (foo && bar)
	baz();
```
```c
while (foo()) {
	baz();
}
```
```c
while (foo())
	baz();
```
```c
for (i = 0; i < 10; i++) {}
```

Return early
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Avoid unnecessary condition nesting by returning as soon as there's an error, or the function has done its useful work.

Gotos are a perfectly acceptable way to reduce the number of exit points.  You'll often see the ``finish`` or ``release``
label used in module code for this purpose.

**Good**
```c
int my_func(char const *value)
{
	void *out;

	if (input_parse(&out, value) < 0) return -1;
	if (output_write(out) < 0) return -1;

	return 0;
}
```

**Bad**
```c
int my_func(char const *value)
{
	void *out;

	if (input_parse(&out, value) == 0) {
		if (output_write(out) < 0) return -1;
	} else {
		return -1;
	}

	return 0;
}
```

Error gotos jump backwards
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Error exit points and their goto labels should be defined the first time they occur in a function.


**Good**
```c
int my_func(char const *value)
{
	void *out;

	if (input_parse(&out, value) < 0) {
	error:
		ERROR("Something bad happened");
		return -1;
	}
	if (output_write(out) < 0) goto error;

	return 0;
}
```

**Bad**
```c
int my_func(char const *value)
{
	void *out;

	if (input_parse(&out, value) < 0) goto error;
	if (output_write(out) < 0) goto error;

	return 0;

error:
	ERROR("Something bad happened");
	return -1;
}
```

Const on the right
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Allows const to be read consistently as applying to the type on the left.

**Good**
```c
char const * const *
```

**Bad**
```c
const char * const *
```

Variable declarations at the top of blocks
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Variables don't have to be defined at the start of the function, but they should be defined at the start of a block.
This can be any type of block, even an anonymous one ``{}``.

Grouping declarations helps make the code more readable, and makes it easier to see the variables in use within certain areas of the code.

**Good**
```c
int func(int a, int b)
{
	char *my_func_var;
	
	if (a) {
		char *my_if_var;
		
		if (b) return -1;
		my_if_var = "bar";
	}

	my_func_var = "foo";
	return 0;
}
```

**Bad**
```c
inf func(int a, int b)
{
	if (a) {
		if (b) return 0;
		char *my_if_var = "bar";
	}

	char *my_func_var = "foo";
	return 0;
}
```